.TH AMIDIMINDER 1
.SH NAME
amidiview \- MIDI connection tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B amidiview view
.br
.B amidiview list \fR[options]\fB
.br
.B amidiview connect \fR[options]\fB
.br
.B amidiview disconnect \fR[options]\fB

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B amidiview
is a tool for easily viewing and managing ALSA Sequencer MIDI connections.  The
main tool is interactive and provides a textual user interface for viewing all
ports in the system, and the connections between them. The interface provides
easy commands for making and breaking connections.
.PP
The additional commands offer command line interface to the same functionality.

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
\fBview\fR
Interactive view of ports and connections in the system. Connections can be
made and removed using the keyboard.

This is the default operation of \fBamidiview\fR if no subcommand is specified.

The terminal must support xterm style control sequences, which pretty much
all do these days.
.TP
\fBlist\fR [\fB-p\fR] [\fB-c\fR] [\fB--clients\fR] [\fB--plain\fR|\fB--details\fR] [\fB-a\fR] [\fB-n\fR]
Output a textual list of ports, connections, and/or clients.

.B Options
.TP +12n
.in +7n
.B -p, --ports
Output a list of ports
.TP +12n
.in +7n
.B -c, --connections
Output a list of connections
.TP +12n
.in +7n
.B --clients
Output a list of clients

If none of the above three options are given, then ports and connections
will be output.
.TP +12n
.in +7n
.B --plain
Output only the names, one per line. Useful for scripts
.TP +12n
.in +7n
.B --details
Include type and capability details for ports and clients.
.TP +12n
.in +7n
.B -a, --all
Include all ALSA Sequencer clients and ports. Normally clients and ports that
are for system level use are omitted.
.TP +12n
.in +7n
.B -n, --numeric
Sort items by ALSA id number, rather than by name.
.PP
.TP
\fBconnect \fIsender destination\fR
.TP
\fBdisconnect \fIsender destination\fR
Make or removes a connections between two ports.

The ports are specified in one of several ways:
.in +7n
.TS
tab(|) nospaces;
l l l x
l lI lB x.
     | Syntax                      | Example

(a)  | client                      | Digitakt
(b)  | client\fB:\fIport-name      | Launch Pad:DAW
(c)  | client\fB:*                 | Launch Pad:*
     | \fB*                        | *
(d)  | id\fB:\fIid                 | 128:0
.TE
.IP (a)
This is the most common way to specify a port, with with just the client name.
In this case in matches the client's first sender or destination port as
needed. The client name can be any substring of the full client name. Put
the name in quotes to match only the whole client name.
.IP (b)
The name of the port can be specified, useful for devices that have multiple
ports. Again, any substring of the port name will work. Use quotes for exact
matches.
.IP (c)
Wildcards will match all ports on a client, or all ports on all clients. Using
this form can make or break multiple connections.
.IP (d)
Alsa ID numbers can be used, but if so, must be used for both client and port.

These matching rules are the same as used by \fBamidiminder\fR profiles. See
.BR amidiminder-profile (5) for details.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR amidiminder-profile (5)
