.TH AMIDIMINDER 1
.SH NAME
amidiminder \- Utility to manage MIDI device connections
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B amidiminder load \fIfile
.br
.B amidiminder save \fIfile
.br
.B amidiminder reset [\fB--keep\fR] [\fB--hard\fR]
.br
.B amidiminder check \fIfile
.br
.B amidiminder status

.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B amidiminder daemon
maintains a set of desired connections (the \fIprofile\fR) between ALSA
sequencer MIDI ports. See
.BR amidiminder-daemon (8)
for more information.
.PP
A profile is a set of rules for connecting MIDI ports between devices and/or
software. Once a profile is loaded, the daemon will make those connections
automatically as the devices are connected to the system, and software is
started.
.PP
Profiles are written in a simple rules syntax. See
.BR amidiminder-profile (5)
for the rules format.
.PP
The daemon also observes connections made by the user (via commands such as
.BR aconnect (1)
) and from within other software. These are remembered as a set of \fIobserved\fR
rules, and these connections are also maintained.
.PP
These user commands let you manage the profile of connections used by the
daemon.

.SH COMMANDS
.SS Control commands
.TP
\fBload \fIfile\fR
The file is first checked for rule syntax, and if it fails, the command exits,
making no changes.

If it passes the check, The profile is loaded from the file. Observed rules are
dropped. All existing connections are disconnected. Then finally, ports are
reconnected according to the rules in the newly loaded profile.

A file name of \fB-\fR (hyphen-minus) loads from the standard input.
.TP
\fBsave \fIfile\fR
Write the current profile, plus all the observed connection rules, to the
file.

A file name of \fB-\fR (hyphen-minus) writes to the standard output.
.TP
.BR reset " [" --keep "] [" --hard "]"
Reloads the current profile: Observed rules are dropped.
All existing connections are disconnected. Then finally, ports are reconnected
according to the rules in the current profile.

.B Options
.TP +12n
.in +7n
.B --keep
Keep the observed rules, don't drop them.
.TP +12n
.in +7n
.B --hard
Resync all connections and ports from the ALSA Seq system. This should never be
necissary, but misbehaving software might cause the daemon to be out of sync
with reality. If you find you need this, please contact the author.
.SS Utility commands
.TP
\fBcheck \fIfile\fR
Check that the file parses as a valid profile. Errors are reported by line.

A file name of \fB-\fR (hyphen-minus) checks from the standard input.

The exit status of the command is \fB0\fR if the file is a valid profile,
and \fB1\fR if there are any syntax errors.
.TP
.B status
Connects to the daemon, retreives some status information, and outputs it.
This is a good way to check that the daemon is up and running.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP RUNTIME_DIRECTORY
The path to the directory that has the UNIX-domain socket used to communicate
between the control commands and the running daemon.

Note: If the system configuration is changed such that the daemon is launched
with a non-default value for this variable, it must also
be set the same way when using any of the control coammands.

.SH FILES
.IP /run/amidiminder
The default location of the runtime directory. If the \fBRUNTIME_DIRECTORY\fR
environment variable is not set, this is the path used.

.IP control.socket
This UNIX-domain socket is located in the runtime directory, and is used to
communicate between the control commands and the daemon.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR amidiminder-profile (5),
.BR amidiminder-daemon (8)
