.TH AMIDIMINDER-DAEMON 8

.SH NAME
amidiminder-daemon \- MIDI device connection daemon

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B amidiminder daemon
.RB [ -p ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B amidiminder daemon
maintains a set of desired connections (the \fIprofile\fR) between ALSA
sequencer MIDI ports.
.PP
ALSA provides library calls, and a user tool
.BR aconnect (1)
for connecting pairs of ports.  However, these connections are lost when either
of the member of the pair disappears, such as if a MIDI device is unplugged,
or an application with ports exits. Restoring the port doesn't restore the prior
connections it had. As MIDI gear is often inadvertantly unplugged and replugged,
or power cycled, losing these connections is a significant frustration.
.PP
The
.B amidiminder daemon
takes care of this: It tracks what connections were desired between ports, and
automatically reestablishes those connections when ports reattach to the
system. Connections (and disconnections) initiated by the user (or applications)
are tracked and remembered as well. The whole desired connection state is
persistent, even across system reboots, so that the configuration
is quickly maintained once devices power back up and applications restarted.
.SS State
The desired connection state is composed of two parts:
.HP
.B Profile rules
The profile is a list of rules for which ports to connect. It is written
in a simple syntax that makes it possible to express these connections, even
when the devices aren't current connected. The commands in
.BR amidiminder (1)
are used by the user to load, save, and reset the profile. The user can
have multiple profile files prepared, and by loading them, reconfigure all the
connections with one command.
.HP
.B Observed rules
These are a set of rules the daemon learns by observing connections made by the
user via commands such as
.BR aconnect (1)
and by other software. These rules are considered to override any profile
rules, should they conflict.  This allows a change from the current profile
to be just as robust as the profile itself. The user can also easily drop the
observed rules by loading another profile, or using the
.B amidiminder reset
command.
.PP
Both parts of the connection state are presisted into the file system so that
they survive restarts of the deamon, or the whole system.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -p\fR,\fB --port-details
Causes output of all ALSA sequencer port information when ports are added or
re-scanned by the deamon. This information is primarily for understanding how
a piece of hardware is representing itself to the ALSA sequencer.


.SH ENVIRONMENT
These varibales are normally set by
.BR systemd (8)
before it launches the daemon.

.IP STATE_DIRECTORY
The path to the directory that the daemon uses to hold a copies of both the
profile rules and the observed rules. This directory should not be on a
temporary file system so that the desired connection state survives reboots.

.IP RUNTIME_DIRECTORY
The path to the directory that has the UNIX-domain socket used to communicate
between the control commands and the running daemon.

Note: If the system configuration is changed such that the \fBamidiminder\fR
daemon is launched with a non-default value for this variable, it must also
be set the same way when using any of the control coammands.

.SH FILES
.IP /var/lib/amidiminder
The default location of the state direcotry.

.IP /run/amidiminder
The default location of the runtime directory.

.IP profile.rules
The current, loaded profile rules. Located in the state directory.

.IP observed.rules
The observed rules. Located in the state directory.

.IP control.socket
A UNIX-domain socket, located in the runtime direcotry. It is used to
communicate between the control commands and the daemon.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR amidiminder (1),
.BR amidiminder-profile (5)

