.TH AMIDIMINDER-PROFILE 5

.SH NAME
midiminder-profile \- Format for MIDI connection rules

.SH DESCRIPTION
Profiles describe a list of rules for making connections between ALSA sequencer
MIDI ports. Users can create a profile rules file to describe how they want
their MIDI environment connected, then use
.BR midiminder (1)
to load it into the system. Connections will be made according to the rules,
and if some of the devices or software are not yet on-line, connections for
those ports will be made when they later come on-line.
.PP
The
.BR midiminder-daemon (8)
will then continue to ensure these connections are made if devices are
unplugged and re-plugged, or even if the whole system restarts.

.SH CONCEPTS

.SS ALSA Sequencer structure
Each device or application that wants to have MIDI ports, registers with ALSA
as a "client". This client has a name, chosen by the device or application,
and a number, assigned by ALSA. As the number isn't predictable, profiles only
refer to client names.
.PP
Each client can have one or more ports, and these ports can be \fIin\fR ports,
supplying MIDI data, \fIout\fR ports (receiving MIDI) data, or they can be both.
Hardware devices typically have just one port that is both in and out.
Applications often have separate in ports and out ports.
.PP
Like clients, the ports also have both a name supplied by the device or
application, and a number supplied by ALSA. Here, the numbers are stable, and
predictable, and so in profiles rules can refer to ports by either name or
number.
.PP
Connections are unidirectional, from one in port to one out port.

.SS Rules
Rules specify ports that should be connected. Rules can have \fIwildcard\fR
specifications, so they match multiple ports and cause more than one connection
to be made.
.PP
Rules can also be \fIdisallow\fR rules, specifying ports that should not be
connected. This can be useful to restrict a wildcard rule to not apply in some
circumstances. Disallow rules can also be generated when the
.BR midiminder-daemon (8)
observes the user expressly disconnecting two ports that the profile rules
connected. Such a disallow rule acts as an override.
.PP
A profile consists of a sequence of rules. The order matters, and the last
rule matching a pair of ports governs what happens.
.BR midiminder-daemon (8)
also maintains a list of observed rules. These logically follow the profile
rules.

.SH EXAMPLE
This profile connects some hardware MIDI devices to a piece of software
called "bicycle" (a MIDI looper).
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
bicycle:control <-- nanoKEY2
bicycle:control <-- Erae Touch
   # These connect my controllers to the software. Sometimes I
   # use the nanoKEY2 keyboard, sometimes I use the Erae surface
   # to play notes. These rules connect both, so which ever is
   # plugged in gets connected.

bicycle:control <-> Launchpad Pro:MIDI
   # Connects the Launchpad to the software, and vice-versa.
   # This allows buttons on the Launchpad to control the
   # software, and the software to control the lights on the
   # Launchpad.
   #
   # The Launchpad presents three MIDI ports, and we want the one
   # that is just plain MIDI from the unit.

bicycle:synth --> MicroMonsta
bicycle:synth --> Hydrasynth
bicycle:synth --> Midihub:1
   # Connects the music output of the software to my synths. The
   # last line connects to a MIDI interface, which has four
   # distinct MIDI outputs, numbered from 0. Here we connect to
   # the second one.

Faderfox --> Midihub:3
   # Lastly, connect a hardware control surface with knobs to the
   # fourth output of the MIDI interface. This is just hardware
   # to hardware connection, used to adjust the parameters of my
   # reverb unit, connected to the MIDI interface.
.EE
.in
.PP
Placing the above text in a file, say \fBbicycle-profile.rules\fR,
these connections could be quickly established by running this
command:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
& \fBmidiminder load bicycle-profile.rules\fR
.EE
.in

.SH SYNTAX
.SS Profile structure
Profiles are text files with one rule per line.  Comments begin with
a number sign (\fB#\fR), and continue to the end of the line. Empty
lines (including comment only lines) are ignored.  Leading and trailing
white space around a rule is also ignored.
.SS Clients
Clients are specified in one of three ways:
.in +7n
.TS
tab(|) nospaces;
l l l x
l lI lB x.
                        | Syntax                  | Example

(a) by partial name     | client-name             | Monsta
(b) by full exact name  | \fB"\fIclient-name\fB"  | "Launchpad Pro"
                        | \fB'\fIclient-name\fI'  | 'Launchpad Pro'
(c) by wildcard         | \fB*                    | *
.TE
.TP
(a)
A client can be specified by any part of its name. Spaces are allowed. Since
client names can be long, any substring can be given. For example,
\fBMonsta\fR will match a client named \fBMicroMonsta\ 2\fR.
.IP
Be aware that some client specifications will match multiple devices, should
your system have them. For example, \fBLaunchpad\fR will match both a
\fBLaunchpad\ Pro\fR and a \fBLaunchpad\ Pro\ MK3\fR. This may, or may not, be
exactly what you want.
.TP
(b)
A client can be specified by its full name, by putting the specification in
double quotes. So \fB"Launchpad\ Pro"\fR will only match a \fBLaunchpad\ Pro\fR,
but not a \fBLaunchpad\ Pro\ MK3\fR.
.TP
(c)
This specification matches all clients.

.SS Ports
Ports are specified in one five ways:
.in +7n
.TS
tab(|) nospaces;
l l l x
l lI lB x.
                  | Syntax                      | Example

(a) by default    | client                      | Digitakt
(b) by name       | client\fB:\fIport-name      | Launch Pad:DAW
(c) by exact name | client\fB:"\fIport-name\fB" | Launch Pad:"Live Port"
                  | client\fB:'\fIport-name\fI' | Launch Pad:'Live Port'
(d) by number     | client\fB:\fInumber         | Launch Pad:1
(e) by wildcard   | client\fB:*                 | Launch Pad:*
                  | \fB*                        | *
.TE
.IP (a)
This is the most common way to specify a port, with with just the client name.
In this case in matches the first \fIin\fR or \fIout\fR port the client has,
depending on the direction the connection is being made.
.IP (b)
A port can be specified by any part of it's name, in the same way
as clients can.
.IP (c)
A port can be specified by its exact, full name, by placing the name in quotes.
.IP (d)
Ports can be specified by number. Port numbers start at 0.
.IP (e)
This is a wildcard specification, and matches all ports of the client.
The special form of just a single wildcard character (\fB*\fR) matches all
ports on all clients. Use with caution.
.PP
There are two special forms for a port specification. These specify all
ports on all clients that are tagged (by the device or software creating
the ports) in a certain way.
.in +7n
.TS
tab(|) nospaces;
l l x
l lB x.
                            | Syntax

(f) all hardware ports      | .hw
(g) all application ports   | .app
.TE
.PP
Note that there is no client specification, nor a colon (\fB:\fR) with these
specifications.

.SS Note about port names
ALSA port names often have the client name repeated, sometimes more than once.
Here are some examples:
.IP
Pure Data:Pure Data Midi-In
.br
Midihub MH-1Z109TZ:Midihub MH-1Z109TZ MIDI 1
.br
nanoKONTROL:nanoKONTROL nanoKONTROL _ CTRL
.PP
These long port names are difficult to read, and provide no useful extra
information since the client is always listed as well. Therefore,
\fBmidiminder\fR shortens these port names down by removing leading copies of
the client name and whitespace.
.TS
tab(|) nospaces;
l l l x
l l lB x.
Client               | Full Port Name                 | Shortened Name

Pure Data            | Pure Data Midi-In              | Midi-In
Midihub MH-1Z109TZ   | Midihub MH-1Z109TZ MIDI 1      | MIDI 1
nanoKONTROL          | nanoKONTROL nanoKONTROL _ CTRL | CTRL
.TE
.PP
In rules, names will be matched against this shortened port name.
Exact matches are matched against both the short, and original long name.

.SS Connection rules
A connection rule consists of a port, a connector, and another port.  There
are three types of connector:
.TP
.IR "portA " --> " portB"
Specifies a connection from \fIportA\fR to \fIportB\fR.
.TP
.IR "portA " <-- " portB"
Specifies a connection in the other direction, from \fIportB\fR to \fIportA\fR
.TP
.IR "portA " <-> " portB"
This is just a short hand for specifying both rules above. Assuming both ports
are in and out ports, the this will cause two connections to be made, one in
each direction.
.PP
Note: In the forms above, any number of hyphens (\fB-\fR) are accepted in the
arrow.

.SS Disallow rules
A disallow rule has exactly the same form as a connection rule, only the
connector has an \fBx\fR added in the arrow:
.RS
.IR "portA " -x-> " portB"
.br
.IR "portA " <-x- " portB"
.br
.IR "portA " <-x-> " portB"
.RE
.PP
These rules will keep a connection from being made when prior rules (including
wildcard rules) would have made one.

.SH EXAMPLES
The directory \fB/usr/share/midiminder/examples/\fR contains several useful
examples of profile files.
.TP
.B example.rules
\(em a concise summary of rule forms by example
.TP
.B generic.rules
\(em a profile to connect any hardware to any software
.TP
.B looper.rules
\(em an example for a live performance with software and hardware

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR midiminder (1),
.BR midiminder-daemon (8)
